ChangeCoins.md Re-write. (#468)
zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc: docs/using-wasabi/ChangeCoins.md

---
{
  "title": "What to do with Change Coins",
  "description": "Details about the privacy of different types of change and strategies for using them. This is the Wasabi documentation, an archive of knowledge about the open-source, non-custodial and privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet for desktop."
}
---

## What to do with "change" coins

[[toc]]

## Types of change

### Non-CoinJoin change

Let's assume you want to send 0.5 bitcoins to Alice. In the `Send` tab you select one or more of your own UTXO's, and they are the input of the transaction. For example, let's assume that you choose a red-shield / anonymity set 1 UTXO worth 2 bitcoins.
You put Alice's address in the `Receiving Address` field, and set the spending `Amount`. In this example, we are sending 0.5 bitcoin. This will be the first output of the transaction.   

Since your chosen UTXO contained 2 bitcoins, after sending 0.5 to Alice there will be 1.5 bitcoin remaining from the original amount. This left over amount will automatically go to a new address in your wallet, and this is called the change output.  

> This leftover 1.5 bitcoin change UTXO is connected to the input UTXO of the transaction, and thus also has an `anonymity set' of 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leftover 1.5 bitcoin change UTXO is connected to the input UTXO of the transaction, and thus also has an `anonymity set` of 1.
```

As a result, when you send any part of this leftover/change coin in a new transaction, it is clear to any observer that you were part of the transaction that sent 0.5 bitcoin to Alice.  

> This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

Author: I agree with changing "send" to `sent`, but not sure if capitalization for Bitcoin/bitcoin is necessary here. 
Technically, it is a "proper noun", but it seems as though it is rarely capitalized as such. I understand that in the context of this statment it is used as a broader general reference as opposed to a more narrow context....but mainly, I guess it just seems odd that, for all the times the word "bitcoin" is used in the document, that it is capitalized just this one time.

> This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

Reviewer: `Bitcoin` is the protocol, `bitcoin` is the currency. 
0.1 bitcoin will be worth a lot
vs
Bitcoin is decentralized

So I think the change is correct, it should be `Bitcoin`. 
I found just one another occurrence that should be capitalize in this document, all the others seems to indicate bitcoin amounts.

> This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

Author: "Bitcoin is the protocol, bitcoin is the currency." 

I agree with that, but the phrase "bitcoin transaction" in the context of the paragraph we're discussing sounds more like a reference to the currency than the protocol to me.

I'd love to hear other's opinions, but if it ends up just being the 3 of us in this conversation I'm fine with whatever any 2 of the 3 of us agree on.

> This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

Reviewer 2: I believe we are rather consistent with having `Bitcoin` as the protocol and `bitcoin` as the currency, so I am in favor of doing this right all the time.

> This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This process is applicable to any Bitcoin transaction where the `sent` amount is less than the total value of the input UTXO.
```

### First round CoinJoin change

> When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive 1 green-shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO. The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect your chosen anonymity set size for that round.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive 1 green-shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO. The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect the anonymity set size for that round.
```
Anonymity set is not chosen by the user.

Author: Yeah, the resultant set is not chosen, but the target for the desired set is.

That's why I chose the word "reflect", rather than something more direct. To indicate that
your chosen set size is a factor, but not the sole determinant.

My main goal was to be concise, without getting off-track into how the A.S. is determined, and I think your suggested change is even better in that regard.

Reviewer: In the first CoinJoin round the target is not a factor. You can put 1 or 1000 and you end up with the same anonimity set.

Author: Well....you're absolutely right. I'm so used to leaving my coins for 2-3 rounds if  necessary to reach my target that I forgot that the example we are discussing is specific to a single round result. My bad on that.

Remember, all inputs and outputs to a CoinJoin round must be exactly the same size. Otherwise, it would be easy to trace any of the output UTXO's back to its original/input UTXO. So, in the vast majority of CoinJoin rounds, there will be at least a small amount of leftover/change after the round has completed.

The small UXTO that is leftover/change from a CoinJoin round is clearly tied to your KYC input UTXO, but the green-shield UTXO is not. If afterwards, you combine the red-shield UTXO with the green-shield UTXO in a single transaction, then it is clear that both came from the same owner. Since your identity was already known in the red-shield/anonset 1 UTXO, it is now linked with certainty to your CoinJoined UTXO.

Whenever you combine and send more than one UTXO in a single transaction, the lowest # anonymity set UTXO of the inputs becomes the overriding anonymity set for all of the UTXO's used in that transaction.

### Second round CoinJoin change

> When you take a 100 anonset UTXO, and you CoinJoin it again with a new 100 anonset round, then you receive one UTXO with new, combined anonset of 200, and one leftover/change UTXO with same anonset as the input UTXO: 100.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you take a 100 anonset UTXO, and you CoinJoin it again in a new 100 participant round, then you receive one UTXO with new, combined anonset of 200, and one leftover/change UTXO with same anonset as the input UTXO: 100.
```

> The change UTXO still has an anonset 100 because it is the leftover, non-CoinJoined change output of a second CoinJoin that used the 100 anonset UTXO as beginning input.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The change UTXO still has an anonset 100 because it is the leftover, non-coinjoined change output of a second CoinJoin that used the 100 anonset UTXO as beginning input.
```

This change can still reveal premix history which is another CoinJoin, but ownership analysis cannot go further back than the first CoinJoin.

> It is ok to use and spend this change output. Depending on who you are sending to, and what level of privacy you desire in that transaction, you could choose to send your coins with an anonset of 100, or for even more privacy, you can choose to send the coins with an anonset of 200. Just remember that if you combine the two in same transaction, your effective anonymity set will be the lower anonymity set number of the selected coins. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is ok to use and spend this change output.
Depending on who you are sending to, and what level of privacy you desire in that transaction, you could choose to send your coins with an anonset of 100, or for even more privacy, you can choose to send the coins with an anonset of 200.
Just remember that if you combine the two in the same transaction, your effective anonymity set will be the lower anonymity set number of the selected coins.
```

## Why change is an issue

Change is not inherently bad, it's a fundamental part of how Bitcoin and the UTXO model works.
However, when sending a coin that is change from an earlier transaction, then the receiver can easily deduce that the sender was also part of the previous transaction that generated the change.

Whenever you are merging coins in one transaction, it becomes clear to any outside observer that these coins belong to the same entity, thus linking the previous transaction history.

You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1` coins with `anonymity set > 1` mixed coins whenever possible, because this will link these coins and negate the privacy of the mixed coins gained through the CoinJoin.

## Your options to use change privately

### Avoid change in the first place.

> Whenever possible, choose UTXO's for transactions where the destination addresses receive the entire value, of your UTXO, and you don't get any change back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever possible, choose UTXO's for transactions where the destination addresses receive the entire value of your UTXO's, and you don't get any change back.
```

Author: My cutting/pasting skills leave a lot to be desired, as do my eyeglasses...I'm glad you're reviewing this.

> Whenever possible, choose UTXO's for transactions where the destination addresses receive the entire value, of your UTXO, and you don't get any change back.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Whenever possible, choose UTXOs for transactions where the destination addresses receive the entire value, of your UTXOs, and you don't get any change back.
```

This can easily be done by clicking the `Max` button in the `Send` tab, which will automatically deduct the mining fee and send the highest amount possible to the destination.
This might not be possible in some cases where you have to pay a specific value of a payment request.

However, in other cases it is possible, for example donations or when depositing to an exchange.

> Consider supporting invaluable projects like [The Tor Project](https://donate.torproject.org/cryptocurrency) or [the Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://supporters.eff.org/donate/donate). You can find a list of organizations that accept bitcoin donations [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Donation-accepting_organizations_and_projects).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider supporting invaluable projects like [The Tor Project](https://donate.torproject.org/cryptocurrency) or [the Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://supporters.eff.org/donate/donate).
You can find a list of organizations that accept bitcoin donations [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Donation-accepting_organizations_and_projects).
```

> ### Spend the change with another entity, where you don't mind if each of the two know that you also sent coins to the other person.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Spend the change with another entity, where you don't mind if each of the two know that you transact with the other entity.
```

Author: Thanks. Your statement says the exact same thing, without losing nuance,  and with fewer words. That was my intent for this entire document.

> For example, if you buy something from Alice that costs 0.03 bitcoin, and you choose a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if you buy something from Alice that costs 0.03 bitcoin, and you choose a UTXO in your wallet containing 0.1 bitcoin to use for payment.
```

> UTXO in your wallet containing 0.10 bitcoin to use for payment. Alice receives her 0.03 bitcoin, and the remaining change (0.07) bitcoin is assigned to another address in your wallet. Since Alice knows the details of the transaction, she knows that the 0.07 bitcoin at that address belongs to you. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alice receives her 0.03 bitcoin, and the remaining change (0.07) bitcoin is assigned to another address in your wallet.
Since Alice knows the details of the transaction, she knows that the 0.07 bitcoin at that address belongs to you. 
```

> If you then send that 0.07 bitcoin to someone else that Alice doesn't like, she can see it and could potentially use that information against you. But if instead you spend the 0.07 bitcoin change in a transaction to Carol, who you know is a good friend of Alice, then Alice probably won't mind.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you then send that 0.07 bitcoin to someone else that Alice doesn't like, she can see it and could potentially use that information against you.
But if instead you spend the 0.07 bitcoin change in a transaction to Carol, who you know is a good friend of Alice, then Alice probably won't mind.
```

`If you then send that 0.07 bitcoin to someone else that Alice doesn't like, she can see it and could potentially use that information against you.`
@MaxHillebrand unless the other person's address is public Alice can't know who that person is, so I think we should maybe remove this.

Author: I think the more relevant risk would be if you sent your change to someone, let's say it's wikileaks. Even though an observer may or may not be able to discern that the address that you sent to is wikileaks, if the observer also sees coins from other people whose identities are known to the observer sending coins to that same address, and the observer does not like those other people, you could be considered "guilty by association"

Reviewer: @yahiheb you can see `Alice` as Binance and `the other person` as a Wasabi CoinJoin. 
"Alice/Binance can see it (and doesn't like it) and could potentially use that information against you". 
So I think it's okay. Maybe could be rephrased?

Reviewer 3: Thank you guys.

Reviewer 2: Good conversation, I agree, though am not sure how to best re-write this... 

Maybe a take from the other side, like this:

```suggestion
If you then send that 0.07 bitcoin to Alice for the next purchase, then she does not gain knowledge of any other coins you might have.
```

Reviewer 3: I think we should keep it as it is (just the new sentence should be in a new line)

### Mix with JoinMarket.

> In [JoinMarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) as a "market taker" you can specify exactly what denomination of equal value outputs are generated in the CoinJoin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In [JoinMarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) as a `market taker` you can specify exactly what denomination of equal value outputs are generated in the CoinJoin.
```

Author: Thanks for all of these little formatting fixes. I've built and maintained quite a few websites using html, javascript, and css over the years, but I'm very new at Markdown.

> So you can send the Wasabi change to your JoinMarket wallet and take an offer to mix for some number of rounds.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So you can send the Wasabi change to your JoinMarket wallet and take an offer to mix for some number of rounds.
```

> The coins you will receive after the JoinMarket tumbling algorithm will have a sufficient anonymity set, and you can use it for spending again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The coins you will receive after the JoinMarket tumbling algorithm will have a sufficient anonymity set, and you can use them for spending again.
```
Should we say `the coin` or `the coins` I am not familiar with JoinMarket.
If it should be `the coin` then ignore my suggestion.

Author: Actually, neither am I, but your "them" suggestion fits better with the plural "coins" in the first part of the statement. I think that consistency is more important than the technicality of how JoinMarket works

### Open a Lightning Network channel.
The Lightning Network can be a very private way of sending bitcoin, and you can choose the channel size to be exactly the size of your change coin.

> However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main Lightning node public key.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main Lightning node public key.
```

> So, a good strategy is to create a new lightning node and public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network. Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main Lightning node for further use.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, a good strategy is to create a new Lightning node and public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network.
Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main Lightning node for further use.
```

Author: Again, I'm not sure if capitalization is necessary here. It seems so inconsistently applied when referring to something that is both a "brand" and in a broader sense, a "technology".
My default would be to not capitalize just for consistency throughout the page, but as you can see from other suggested revision to this document, I am not strongly attached to most of the changes I've suggested. 
I'd like to hear others opinions on the capitalization question in the context of this page, for "bitcoin", "lightning", and "coinjoin".

Reviewer: Imho Lightning as a protocol should always be capitalized.

Reviewer 2: ACK, both the capitalization [it's the protocol] as well as the line separation. 

FYI @davterra, every new sentence must start a new line.

Author: > ACK, both the capitalization [it's the protocol] as well as the line separation.
> 
> FYI @davterra, every new sentence must start a new line.

OMG.....Thanks for putting up with my learning process. I have bookmarked some markdown tutorials and will study them. I have a fair amount of experience building websites using html & css, but I've never used markdown before.

> After the balance of the channel is entirely on the other side, cooperatively close the channel with your peer, so that he gets the only output in the closing transaction.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the balance of the channel is entirely on the other side, cooperatively close the channel with your peer, so that he gets the only output in the closing transaction.
```

Since Wasabi does not yet support Lightning Network functionality, you must use a different wallet for this task.

### Atomic swap into Lightning Network
There are some services that provide an atomic swap where you send the whole change coin to a multisignature hashed time locked contract on-chain.

> In exchange, you receive a payment routed through the Lightning Network into one of your payment channels.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In exchange, you receive a payment routed through the Lightning Network into one of your payment channels.
```

The swap is atomic, meaning either you receive the lightning payment, or you get the bitcoin back on-chain, so the service provider cannot steal from you.

> If you use a regular lightning invoice to receive the funds, then the service provider knows your node's public key and the channel he sends the bitcoin to.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you use a regular Lightning invoice to receive the funds, then the service provider knows your node's public key and the channel he sends the bitcoin to.
```

> For much better privacy, use rendezvous routing so that the sender does not gain knowledge of your receiving node. Also ensure that the communication with the swap server is done over the tor network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For much better privacy, use rendezvous routing so that the sender does not gain knowledge of your receiving node.
Also ensure that the communication with the swap server is done over the tor network.
```

### Consolidate several change coins, but in a CoinJoin directly.
If you consolidate many change coins in a regular non-CoinJoin transaction in the `Send` tab, then any outside observer can easily see that one user controls all these coins.

> But when consolidating in a CoinJoin directly, because there are hundreds of randomly ordered inputs in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But when consolidating in a CoinJoin directly, because there are hundreds of randomly ordered inputs in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.
```

However, a well resourced attacker can perform [CoinJoin sudoku](/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.md#what-is-a-coinjoin-sudoku) to find out which of the many inputs fund the change output.
Further, during the [input registration phase](/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.md#what-is-happening-in-the-input-registration-phase), your wallet provides an input proof for all the registered coins to the coordinator.

> Thus the coordinator knows that you control all these coins, and although zkSNACKs claims to not keep any logs, it is a reasonable assumption that everyone knows what the coordinator knows.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thus the coordinator knows that you control all these coins, and although zkSNACKs claims to not keep any logs, it is a reasonable assumption that everyone knows what the coordinator knows.
```

In this CoinJoin you get an equal value mixed coin, which is no longer tied to any of your previous change coins (inputs), and a change output that can be tied to these inputs.
So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is significantly more private and efficient than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive information.

### Spend the change to the same entity as in the initial transaction, but always use a new address.
So, if in the first transaction you have 0.10 bitcoin and send Alice 0.04 bitcoin, you get 0.06 bitcoin back as change in a new address, which Alice can see belongs to you.

> Now, in a second transaction where you want to send Alice 0.05 bitcoin, you can select that 0.06 bitcoin change coin without losing any privacy, because Alice already knows this is your coin.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, in a second transaction where you want to send Alice 0.05 bitcoin, you can select that 0.06 bitcoin change coin without losing any privacy, because Alice already knows this is your coin.
```

In this second transaction you will get back 0.01 bitcoin as change, which again, will still be known to Alice.

> If, in a third transaction you want to send Alice 0.02 bitcoin, then you can consolidate the 0.01 bitcoin change with a new 0.10 bitcoin mixed coin, thus getting 0.09 bitcoin change.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If, in a third transaction you want to send Alice 0.02 bitcoin, then you can consolidate the 0.01 bitcoin change with a new 0.10 bitcoin mixed coin, thus getting 0.09 bitcoin change.
```

> Now Alice will know that you owned the 0.10 bitcoin and and that you currently own the 0.09 bitcoin change, but she cannot find out about your premix transaction history.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now Alice will know that you owned the 0.10 bitcoin and that you currently own the 0.09 bitcoin change, but she cannot find out about your premix transaction history.
```

### Non-CoinJoin change

Let's assume you want to send 0.5 bitcoins to Alice.
In the `Send` tab you select one or more UTXO, these are the inputs of the transaction.
For example, let's assume that you choose a red-shield / anonymity set 1 UTXO worth 2 bitcoins.
You put Alice's address in the `Receiving Address` field, and set the spending `Amount`.
In this example, we are sending 0.5 bitcoins.
This will be the first output of the transaction.

Since your chosen UTXO contained 2 bitcoins, after sending 0.5 to Alice there will be 1.5 bitcoin remaining from the original amount.
This left over amount will automatically go to a new address in your wallet, and this is called the change output.

This leftover 1.5 bitcoin change UTXO is connected to the input UTXO of the transaction, and thus also has an `anonymity set` of 1.
As a result, when you send this leftover/change coin in a new transaction, it is clear to any observer that you were part of the transaction that sent 0.5 bitcoin to Alice.

This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

### First round CoinJoin change

> When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive 1 green-shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO. The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect the anonymity set size for that round.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive 1 green-shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO.
The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect the anonymity set size for that round.
```

This can easily be done by clicking the `Max` button in the `Send` tab, which will automatically deduct the mining fee and send the highest amount possible to the destination.
This might not be possible in some cases where you have to pay a specific value of a payment request.

However, in other cases it is possible, for example donations or when depositing to an exchange.
Consider supporting invaluable projects like [The Tor Project](https://donate.torproject.org/cryptocurrency) or [the Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://supporters.eff.org/donate/donate).
You can find a list of organizations that accept bitcoin donations [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Donation-accepting_organizations_and_projects).

### Spend the change with another entity, where you don't mind if each of the two know that you transact with the other entity.
For example, if you buy something from Alice that costs 0.03 bitcoin, and you choose a UTXO in your wallet containing 0.1 bitcoin to use for payment.
Alice receives her 0.03 bitcoin, and the remaining change (0.07) bitcoin is assigned to another address in your wallet.

> Since Alice knows the details of the transaction, she knows that the 0.07 bitcoin at that address belongs to you. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since Alice knows the details of the transaction, she knows that the 0.07 bitcoin at that address belongs to you.
```

---
{
  "title": "What to do with Change Coins",
  "description": "Details about the privacy of different types of change and strategies for using them. This is the Wasabi documentation, an archive of knowledge about the open-source, non-custodial and privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet for desktop."
}
---

> ## What to do with "change" coins

Reviewer 2: Changing a `#` title like this will break all the links, both those that cross reference in the docs, as well those we already put on the internet. The titel in the `---{}---` header can be changed like this.  
So I would prefer this not to be changed.

```suggestion
# Change coins
```

Author: Good to know, and thanks for the explanation

[[toc]]

## Types of change

### Non-CoinJoin change

Let's assume you want to send 0.5 bitcoins to Alice.
In the `Send` tab you select one or more UTXO, these are the inputs of the transaction.
For example, let's assume that you choose a red-shield / anonymity set 1 UTXO worth 2 bitcoins.
You put Alice's address in the `Receiving Address` field, and set the spending `Amount`.
In this example, we are sending 0.5 bitcoins.

> This will be the first output of the transaction.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure about the nuances of implementation, but I believe the outputs are ordered randomly, so the destination output is not always the 0 output... 

```suggestion
This will be one output of the transaction.
```

Author: Agreed

Since your chosen UTXO contained 2 bitcoins, after sending 0.5 to Alice there will be 1.5 bitcoin remaining from the original amount.
This left over amount will automatically go to a new address in your wallet, and this is called the change output.

This leftover 1.5 bitcoin change UTXO is connected to the input UTXO of the transaction, and thus also has an `anonymity set` of 1.
As a result, when you send this leftover/change coin in a new transaction, it is clear to any observer that you were part of the transaction that sent 0.5 bitcoin to Alice.

This process is applicable to any bitcoin transaction where the "send" amount is less than the total number of bitcoins associated with a given address/UTXO. 

### First round CoinJoin change

> When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive 1 green-shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive one or more yellow or green or check-mark shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO.
```

Well, this might be true in most cases, but it cannot be said in general... What if you register a coin worth 0.8 btc: you get 0.1 / 100, 0.2 /55, 0.4 / 15, + change / 1. So there are more than one white checkmark shield, and one green shield.

Reviewer 3: What you are saying true Max, but this also depends on:
1- your anonymity set levels
2- the number of participants
3- the amounts that other peers register with
E.g. if you register a coin worth 0.8 btc you will get 4 coins only if at least one participant registered with more than 0.7 btc coin

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say that you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO, and you register it for a CoinJoin round.
Afterwards, depending on the size of your UTXO in relation to the minimum CoinJoin amount, you will
receive two or more UTXOs. 
One of those will be the change left over from the round, and it will retain the red-shield `anonymity set 1` designation.
The remaining UTXO(s) will have either a yellow, green, or check-marked shield. 
You can see the `anonymity set` size for any UTXO by hovering your mouse-pointer over its associated shield.
```

Author: @MaxHillebrand Your suggested revision was more accurate, and that's always better. 
But, this part: "you will afterwards receive one or more yellow or green or check-mark shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO"
was, for me, hard to follow without slowing down and re-reading.
I re-wrote that entire segment. How does my edit look to you, or any others reviewing?

Reviewer 3: Receiving two or more UTXOs doesn't depend only on your UTXO but on other's UTXOs, how about this:
```
Afterwards, depending on the value of your UTXO in relation to the minimum CoinJoin amount and on the value of UTXOs of the other participants, you will receive two or more UTXOs.
```

Reviewer: I think could be useful to add this link somewhere in this explanation: https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.html#what-are-the-equal-denominations-created-in-one-mixing-round.
I feel like most users don't know about the multiple denominations and could get confused.

Reviewer 2: @yahiheb, even if others have an utxo worth more than  0.8, it doesn't matter, as every user must be a part of the 0.1 round... 

@Davterra, I really like [your explanation here](https://github.com/zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc/pull/468#discussion_r363862040), please fix the line 36, it should be in line 35, then you can merge the suggestion.

Reviewer 3: > @yahiheb, even if others have an utxo worth more than 0.8, it doesn't matter, as every user must be a part of the 0.1 round...

I understand that, my point is if you participate with 0.8 btc and all the others participate with less than 0.3 btc you will get two coins 0.1 & 0.7, so receiving more than two UTXOs depend on others' UTXOs value.

The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect the anonymity set size for that round.

In this example, let's assume that the current minimum amount that can be registered for a CoinJoin round is 0.1 bitcoin.
You happen to have a UTXO worth 0.105 bitcoin, and you select it to be coinjoined.

After this CoinJoin round has concluded, you will receive 2 separate UTXOs.
The larger UTXO will have a green-shield that indicates the size of the anonymity set achieved in that CoinJoin round.

> The other, much smaller UTXO will be the amount (change) that was left over, and it will have a red-shield indicating an anonymity set of `1` as it did not participate in the CoinJoin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The other, much smaller UTXO will be the amount (change) that was left over, and it will have a red-shield indicating an anonymity set of `1` as it does not have the equal value denomination of the CoinJoin.
```

The change does participate in the CoinJoin, it just doesn't get any privacy from it...

Reviewer 3: hmm, even if the change is 0.1 btc (it has the value denomination) it still has anonymity set 1 (maybe it will have anonset > 1 if there are others that get the same change amount)

Remember, to have green-shield UTXOs, all denomination outputs of a CoinJoin round must be equal.

> Otherwise, it would be easy to trace any of the output UTXOs back to its original/input UTXO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, it would be easy to trace any of the output UTXOs back to its original input UTXO.
```

So, in the vast majority of CoinJoin rounds, there will be at least a small amount of leftover/change after the round has completed.

The small UTXO that is leftover/change from a CoinJoin round is clearly tied to your KYC input UTXO, but the green-shield UTXO is not.
If afterwards, you combine the red-shield UTXO with a green-shield UTXO in a single transaction, then it is clear that both came from the same owner.

> Since your identity was already known in the red-shield/anonset 1 UTXO, it is now linked with certainty to your coinjoined UTXO.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if `certainty` is the right word here... after all, it is the common ownership input `heuristic`, which is not an apriori truth.

Author: OK, no argument on that. Is this better?

It can now be linked to your coinjoined UTXO.

Whenever you combine and send more than one UTXO in a single transaction, the lowest anonymity set among the inputs becomes the overriding anonymity set for all of the UTXOs used in that transaction.

### Second round CoinJoin change

When you take a 100 anonset UTXO, and you CoinJoin it again in a new 100 participant round, then you receive one UTXO with new, combined anonset of 200, and one leftover/change UTXO with same anonset as the input UTXO: 100.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The change UTXO still has an anonset 100 because it is the leftover, non-coinjoined change output of a second CoinJoin that used the 100 anonset UTXO as beginning input.
This change can still reveal premix history which is another CoinJoin, but ownership analysis cannot go further back than the first CoinJoin.

It is ok to use and spend this change output.
Depending on who you are sending to, and what level of privacy you desire in that transaction, you could choose to send your coins with an anonset of 100, or for even more privacy, you can choose to send the coins with an anonset of 200.

> Just remember that if you combine the two in the same transaction, your effective anonymity set will be the lower anonymity set number of the selected coins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just remember that if you consolidate the two in the same transaction, your effective anonymity set will be the lower anonymity set number of the selected coins, in this case 100.
```

### Open a Lightning Network channel.
The Lightning Network can be a very private way of sending bitcoin, and you can choose the channel size to be exactly the size of your change coin.
However, it is very important that you do not link this non-private coin to your main Lightning node public key.

So, a good strategy is to create a new lightning node and public key, send the whole change coin into this fresh wallet, and open a channel of this amount to a random peer on the network. Then route a payment either to a merchant for goods and services, or to your own main Lightning node for further use.  

After the balance of the channel is entirely on the other side, cooperatively close the channel with your peer, so that he gets the only output in the closing transaction.

Since Wasabi does not yet support Lightning Network functionality, you must use a different wallet for this task.

### Atomic swap into Lightning Network
There are some services that provide an atomic swap where you send the whole change coin to a multisignature hashed time locked contract on-chain.
In exchange, you receive a payment routed through the Lightning Network into one of your payment channels.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think this is all on the same topic, so I like that it is one paragraph.

If you consolidate many change coins in a regular non-CoinJoin transaction in the `Send` tab, then any outside observer can easily see that one user controls all these coins.
But when consolidating in a CoinJoin directly, because there are hundreds of randomly ordered inputs in a Wasabi CoinJoin transaction, it is no longer easy to find out which coins belong to one single user.

However, a well resourced attacker can perform [CoinJoin sudoku](/FAQ/FAQ-GeneralBitcoinPrivacy.md#what-is-a-coinjoin-sudoku) to find out which of the many inputs fund the change output.
Further, during the [input registration phase](/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.md#what-is-happening-in-the-input-registration-phase), your wallet provides an input proof for all the registered coins to the coordinator.
Thus the coordinator knows that you control all these coins, and although zkSNACKs claims to not keep any logs, it is a reasonable assumption that everyone knows what the coordinator knows.

In this CoinJoin you get an equal value mixed coin, which is no longer tied to any of your previous change coins (inputs), and a change output that can be tied to these inputs.

> So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is significantly more private and efficient than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So consolidating your change in a CoinJoin is strictly more private and efficient than consolidating in a regular sending transaction, but it still leaks sensitive information.
```

It is NOT `significantly` more private, in fact, any reasonable attacker can de-anonymize, but it is `strictly` more private, meaning the attacker always has to deploy more resources.

This left over amount will automatically go to a new address in your wallet, and this is called the change output.

This leftover 1.5 bitcoin change UTXO is connected to the input UTXO of the transaction, and thus also has an `anonymity set` of 1.
As a result, when you send this leftover/change coin in a new transaction, it is clear to any observer that you were part of the transaction that sent 0.5 bitcoin to Alice.

This process is applicable to any Bitcoin transaction where the `sent` amount is less than the total value of the input UTXO.

### First round CoinJoin change

When you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO and you register it for a CoinJoin round, you will afterwards receive 1 green-shield `anonymity set 'x'` UTXO, and one red-shield `anonymity set 1` change UTXO.
The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect the anonymity set size for that round.

In this example, let's assume that the current minimum amount that can be registered for a CoinJoin round is 0.1 bitcoin.
You happen to have a UTXO worth 0.105 bitcoin, and you select it to be coinjoined.

After this CoinJoin round has concluded, you will receive 2 separate UTXOs.

> The larger UTXO will have a green-shield that indicates the size of the anonymity set achieved in that CoinJoin round.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The larger UTXO will have a colored shield (red, yellow or green) that indicates the size of the anonymity set achieved in that CoinJoin round.
```

Reviewer 3: This is technically correct but in most cases the shield will not be red (unless there are only very few participants or the user changes the Privacy Levels in the settings to high numbers).

Reviewer 4: Exactly. We should explain better the privacy levels here.

The other, much smaller UTXO will be the amount (change) that was left over, and it will have a red-shield indicating an anonymity set of `1` as it does not have the equal value denomination of the CoinJoin.

Remember, to have green-shield UTXOs, all denomination outputs of a CoinJoin round must be equal.
Otherwise, it would be easy to trace any of the output UTXOs back to its original input UTXO.
So, in the vast majority of CoinJoin rounds, there will be at least a small amount of leftover/change after the round has completed.

The small UTXO that is leftover/change from a CoinJoin round is clearly tied to your KYC input UTXO, but the green-shield UTXO is not.
If afterwards, you combine the red-shield UTXO with a green-shield UTXO in a single transaction, then it is clear that both came from the same owner.

> Since your identity was already known in the red-shield/anonset 1 UTXO, it is now linked with certainty to your coinjoined UTXO.

Author: ```
Since your identity was already known in the red-shield/anonset 1 UTXO, it can now be linked to your coinjoined UTXO.
```

Reviewer 3: ACK

This might not be possible in some cases where you have to pay a specific value of a payment request.

However, in other cases it is possible, for example donations or when depositing to an exchange.
Consider supporting invaluable projects like [The Tor Project](https://donate.torproject.org/cryptocurrency) or [the Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://supporters.eff.org/donate/donate).
You can find a list of organizations that accept bitcoin donations [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Donation-accepting_organizations_and_projects).

### Spend the change with another entity, where you don't mind if each of the two know that you transact with the other entity.
For example, if you buy something from Alice that costs 0.03 bitcoin, and you choose a UTXO in your wallet containing 0.1 bitcoin to use for payment.
Alice receives her 0.03 bitcoin, and the remaining change (0.07) bitcoin is assigned to another address in your wallet.
Since Alice knows the details of the transaction, she knows that the 0.07 bitcoin at that address belongs to you.

> If you then send that 0.07 bitcoin to someone else that Alice doesn't like, she can see it and could potentially use that information against you. But if instead you spend the 0.07 bitcoin change in a transaction to Carol, who you know is a good friend of Alice, then Alice probably won't mind.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This creates a situation where, when you spend these 0.07 bitcoin to an address, Alice knows that you are involved in this transaction, and she could potentially use that information against you.
```

I like it, and tried to simplify it even more here, what do you think @davterra?

> If you then send that 0.07 bitcoin to someone else that Alice doesn't like, she can see it and could potentially use that information against you. But if instead you spend the 0.07 bitcoin change in a transaction to Carol, who you know is a good friend of Alice, then Alice probably won't mind.

Author: Sounds good!

## Types of change

### Non-CoinJoin change

> Let's assume you want to send 0.5 bitcoins to Alice.

Reviewer 3: Here we say `0.5 bitcoins` but [here](https://github.com/zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc/pull/468/files#diff-8416ae050592a2fa3fc77b975fc8589fR28) we say `0.5 bitcoin`, which one is correct?

Author: I'm not sure if there is a conventionally accepted rule for this. Seems as though consistency would be the main goal.

Does it seem reasonable and logical to stipulate that any "bitcoin" reference that includes an amount be:
Singular (bitcoin) if referenced amount <= 1.0
Plural (bitcoins) if referenced amount > 1.0

Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I always thought that `Bitcoin` [capital `B`, the network] can only be singular, and thus it would be `5 Bitcoin UTXOs`.
However, `bitcoin` [lower case `b`, the currency] can be plural, like sats too it would be `One UTXO with 5 bitcoins`.

In the `Send` tab you select one or more UTXO, these are the inputs of the transaction.
For example, let's assume that you choose a red-shield / anonymity set 1 UTXO worth 2 bitcoins.
You put Alice's address in the `Receiving Address` field, and set the spending `Amount`.
In this example, we are sending 0.5 bitcoins.
This will be one output of the transaction.

Since your chosen UTXO contained 2 bitcoins, after sending 0.5 to Alice there will be 1.5 bitcoin remaining from the original amount.
This left over amount will automatically go to a new address in your wallet, and this is called the change output.

This leftover 1.5 bitcoin change UTXO is connected to the input UTXO of the transaction, and thus also has an `anonymity set` of 1.
As a result, when you send this leftover/change coin in a new transaction, it is clear to any observer that you were part of the transaction that sent 0.5 bitcoin to Alice.

This process is applicable to any Bitcoin transaction where the `sent` amount is less than the total value of the input UTXO.

### First round CoinJoin change

Let's say that you have a KYC red-shield `anonymity set 1` UTXO, and you register it for a CoinJoin round.

> Afterwards, depending on the size of your UTXO in relation to the minimum CoinJoin amount, you will receive two or more UTXOs. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Afterwards, depending on the value of your UTXO in relation to the minimum CoinJoin amount and on the value of UTXOs of the other participants, you will receive two or more UTXOs.
```
I still think we should mention that receiving more than two UTXOs depend on others' UTXOs value.
https://github.com/zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc/pull/468#discussion_r364804468

One of those will be the change left over from the round, and it will retain the red-shield `anonymity set 1` designation.

> The remaining UTXO(s) will have either a yellow, green, or check-marked shield. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The remaining UTXO(s) will have either a yellow, green, or a check-marked shield.
```

> The remaining UTXO(s) will have either a yellow, green, or check-marked shield. 

Author: ```suggestion
The remaining UTXO(s) will have either a yellow, a green, or a check-marked shield. 
```

Reviewer 2: @davterra, this is your branch, so only you can commit these kinds of suggestions. Especially for such trivial fixes, you can commit them directly, without explicit review from others, I would say.

You can see the `anonymity set` size for any UTXO by hovering your mouse-pointer over its associated shield.
The number represented by 'x' shown in the green-shield will reflect the anonymity set size for that round.

In this example, let's assume that the current minimum amount that can be registered for a CoinJoin round is 0.1 bitcoin.
You happen to have a UTXO worth 0.105 bitcoin, and you select it to be coinjoined.

After this CoinJoin round has concluded, you will receive 2 separate UTXOs.

> The larger UTXO will have a colored shield (red, yellow or green) that indicates the size of the anonymity set achieved in that CoinJoin round.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The larger UTXO will have a colored shield (red, yellow or green, based on your [Privacy Level Settings](https://docs.wasabiwallet.io/FAQ/FAQ-UseWasabi.md#how-can-i-change-the-anonset-target)) that indicates the size of the anonymity set achieved in that CoinJoin round.
```

Reviewer 4: @yahiheb

Reviewer 3: ACK

You want to avoid merging `anonymity set 1` coins with `anonymity set > 1` mixed coins whenever possible, because this will link these coins and negate the privacy of the mixed coins gained through the CoinJoin.

## Your options to use change privately

### Avoid change in the first place.
Whenever possible, choose UTXO's for transactions where the destination addresses receive the entire value of your UTXO's, and you don't get any change back.
This can easily be done by clicking the `Max` button in the `Send` tab, which will automatically deduct the mining fee and send the highest amount possible to the destination.
This might not be possible in some cases where you have to pay a specific value of a payment request.

However, in other cases it is possible, for example donations or when depositing to an exchange.
Consider supporting invaluable projects like [The Tor Project](https://donate.torproject.org/cryptocurrency) or [the Electronic Frontier Foundation](https://supporters.eff.org/donate/donate).

> You can find a list of organizations that accept bitcoin donations [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Donation-accepting_organizations_and_projects).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can find a list of organizations that accept Bitcoin donations [here](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Donation-accepting_organizations_and_projects).
```

### Spend the change with another entity, where you don't mind if each of the two know that you transact with the other entity.
For example, if you buy something from Alice that costs 0.03 bitcoin, and you choose a UTXO in your wallet containing 0.1 bitcoin to use for payment.

> Alice receives her 0.03 bitcoin, and the remaining change (0.07) bitcoin is assigned to another address in your wallet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alice receives her 0.03 bitcoin, and the remaining change 0.07 bitcoin is assigned to another address in your wallet.
```

Since Alice knows the details of the transaction, she knows that the 0.07 bitcoin at that address belongs to you.

> This creates a situation where, when you spend these 0.07 bitcoin to an address, Alice knows that you are involved in this transaction, and she could potentially use that information against you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you later spend these 0.07 bitcoin to an address, Alice knows that you are involved in this transaction, and she could potentially use that information against you.
```
